---
layout: post
title: Rails i18n
date: 2016-03-29 10:11:50 +0300
access: public
categories: [rails i18n]
---

configuration of Rails app to support I18n.

<!-- more -->

* TOC
{:toc}

## routes

_routes.rb_:

```ruby
Rails.application.routes.draw do
  scope '(:locale)', locale: /en/ do
    # all your routes
  end
end
```

_application_controller.rb_:

```ruby
class ApplicationController < ActionController::Base
  before_action :set_locale

  ...

private

  def set_locale
    I18n.locale = params[:locale] || I18n.default_locale
  end

  def default_url_options options = {}
    options.merge locale: params[:locale]
  end

  ...
end
```

- with `en` locale (e.g. <http://test.com/en/foo>):

  - optional dynamic segment matches (`params[:locale] = 'en'`)
  - all other routes match as usual
  - `I18n.locale` is set `'en'` in `ApplicationController#set_locale`
  - `locale: en` option is merged into default URL options passed to all URL
    helpers - all generated URLs in current request will have path starting with `en/`

- with `ru` locale (e.g. <http://test.com/ru/foo>):

  - optional dynamic segment doesn't match
  - `no route matches` error because there is no route starting with `ru`

- without any locale (e.g. <http://test.com/foo>):

  - optional dynamic segment doesn't match (`params[:locale] = nil`)
  - all other routes match as usual
  - `I18n.locale` is set to default locale (`'ru'`) in `ApplicationController#set_locale`
  - `locale: nil` option is merged into default URL options passed to all URL
    helpers - all generated URLs in current request will have path without locale

this scheme doesn't work with custom URL generator class that includes
included `Rails.application.routes.url_helpers` module.
URL helpers available from this module won't have access to view context and
consequently to default URL options set in `ApplicationController` -
they will try to use the first argument as a value for `locale` parameter
which will result in `no route matches` error.
solution: don't use URL generator classes and pass view context explicitly
whenever it's necessary to use URL helpers outside of controller or view.

### active admin

AA controllers are not inherited from `ApplicationController` and
consequently don't have correct default URL options set.

that is why URL helpers in AA don't generate correct URLs
(for the same reason as URL helpers in custom URL generator classes above).

simple solution is to exclude AA routes from `locale` scope in _routes.rb_:

```ruby
Rails.application.routes.draw do
  scope '(:locale)', locale: /en/ do
    ...
  end

  ActiveAdmin.routes(self)
end
```

## RSpec

**WARNING**: obsolete section - see [rails console](#rails-console) for details.

for some obscure reason locale is not set to default locale
(`config.i18n.default_locale` option in _application.rb_)
and defaults to `:en`.

thusly it has to be set manually (either to `:ru` or `I18n.default_locale`):

- in each spec:

  ```ruby
  before { I18n.locale = I18n.default_locale }
  ```

- globally in _spec/rails_helper.rb_ (or support file in _spec/support/_):

  ```ruby
  RSpec.configure do |config|
    config.before :suite do
      I18n.locale = I18n.default_locale
    end
  end
  ```

**NOTE**: translations from class methods are loaded before `before` block!

## rails console

by default locale is `:en` (e.g. in rails console and RSpec) even when
default locale is set to `:ru` in _application.rb_.

to fix it add initializer _config/initializers/i18n.rb_:

```ruby
I18n.locale = :ru
I18n.load_path += Dir[Rails.root.join('config/locales/**/*.yml')]
I18n.reload!
```

adding all `yml` files from _config/locales/_ to load path is not obligatory
here since all translations from _config/locales/*.rb,yml_ must be auto loaded.

adding this initializer fixes locale for RSpec as well -
it's no longer necessary to explicitly set locale in RSpec config files.

## mailers

_application.rb_:

```ruby
config.action_mailer.default_url_options = {
  host: Pumba::DOMAIN, only_path: false, locale: I18n.locale
}
```

## Sidekiq

<https://github.com/mperham/sidekiq/issues/750>

_config/initializers/sidekiq.rb_:

```ruby
require 'sidekiq/middleware/i18n'
```

## Capybara

URL helpers used in feature specs don't use default URL options from
`ApplicationController` for the same reason as URL helpers from custom
URL generator class (see [above](#routes)).

one workaround for this problem is to define
ad hoc `default_url_options` method for specs.

_spec/support/capybara_support.rb_:

```ruby
module CapybaraSupport
  def default_url_options
    { locale: nil }
  end
end
```

then include this module in each feature spec that uses URL helpers:

```ruby
include CapybaraSupport

feature 'sign in' do
  ...
end
```
