---
layout: post
title: Phoenix
date: 2016-11-12 16:21:40 +0300
access: public
categories: [phoenix]
---

Phoenix notes based on "Programming Phoenix" book by Chris McCord and
[official guides](https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/overview.html).

<!-- more -->

* TOC
{:toc}
<hr>

## using IEx with Phoenix app

- `iex` - doesn't load your app (equivalent of `irb`)
- `iex -S mix` - loads your app by executing _mix.exs_ script
  (equivalent of `rails console`)
- `iex -S mix phoenix.server` - loads your app and launches web server
  (`rails console` inside `rails server` - or vice versa)

## Mix tasks

- `mix phx.server` = `rails server`
- `mix phx.routes` = `rake routes`
- `mix phx.gen.secret` = `rake secret`

## endpoints

<https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/routing.html#path-helpers>:

> Think of endpoints as the entity that handles requests just up to the point
> where the router takes over. That includes starting the app/server, applying
> configuration, and applying the plugs common to all requests.

<https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/endpoint.html>:

> Phoenix applications starts the HelloWeb.Endpoint as a supervised process.
> By default, the Endpoint is added to the supervision tree in
> lib/hello/application.ex as a supervised process. Each request begins and
> ends its lifecycle inside your application in an endpoint. The endpoints
> handles starting the web server and transforming requests through several
> defined plugs before calling the Router.

> Endpoints gather together common functionality and serve as entrance and
> exit for all of the HTTP requests to your application. The endpoint holds
> plugs that are common to all requests coming into your application.

> If code reloading is enabled, a socket will be used to communicate to the
> browser that the page needs to be reloaded when code is changed on the server.

> It is also possible for an application to have multiple endpoints,
> each with its own supervision tree.

## routes

<https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/routing.html>

> - Routes which begin with an HTTP verb name expand to a single clause of the match function.
> - Routes which begin with ‘resources’ expand to 8 clauses of the match function.
> - Resources may restrict the number of match function clauses by using the only: or except: options.
> - Any of these routes may be nested.
> - Any of these routes may be scoped to a given path.
> - Using the as: helper option in a scope can reduce duplication.
> - Using the as: helper option for scoped routes eliminates unreachable paths.

### `as:` option

<https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/routing.html#scoped-routes>

passing `as:` for `scope` option allows to change the name of path helpers
for all routes inside `scope` block:

```elixir
scope "/v1", as: :v1 do
  get "/cards", CardController
  # other routes
end
```

or else it's possible to do it on per-route basis by passing `as:` option
to individual routes:

```elixir
scope "/v1" do
  get "/cards", CardController, as: :v1
  # other routes
end
```

### singleton routes (singular resources in Rails)

```elixir
resources "/sessions", SessionController, singleton: true
```

=

```ruby
resource :session
```

### scopes

<https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/routing.html#scoped-routes>

> Note that Phoenix will assume that the path we set ought to begin with a slash,
> so scope "/admin" do and scope "admin" do will both produce the same results.

according to my experience this is not true:

```elixir
scope "/", BillingWeb do
  pipe_through :api

  scope "v1" do
    # ...
  end
end
```

```sh
$ mix phx.routes
warning: router paths should begin with a forward slash, got: "v1"
```

### `accepts` plug

`accepts` plug in router lists MIME types supported in `Accept`
request header - it doesn't work with `Content-Type` request header.

if MIME type is not specified in `Accept` request header response is
still rendered as usual - only when unsupported MIME type is explicitly
set in `Accept` request header is error raised (rendering error page
in Markdown for some reason):

```
12:02:59.285 [debug] ** (Phoenix.NotAcceptableError) no supported media type in accept header.

Expected one of ["json"] but got the following formats:

  * "application/html" with extensions: []
```

## plugs

<https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/plug.html>

> The basic idea of Plug is to unify the concept of a “connection” that we
> operate on. This differs from other HTTP middleware layers such as Rack,
> where the request and response are separated in the middleware stack.

module plug:

> The module only needs to implement two functions:
>
> - init/1 which initializes any arguments or options to be passed to call/2
> - call/2 which carries out the connection transformation. call/2 is just a
>   function plug that we saw earlier

## controllers

<https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/controllers.html>

> Phoenix controllers also build on the Plug package, and are themselves plugs.

> A step beyond this is rendering pure JSON with the json/2 function. We need
> to pass it something that the Poison library can parse into JSON, such as a map.

> It is worth noting that the text/2, json/2, and html/2 functions require
> neither a Phoenix view, nor a template to render.

> Phoenix allows us to change formats on the fly with the _format query string parameter.

if no format is specified explicitly with `_format` query parameter it's
considered to be the first one accepted by current pipeline in router
(say, `json` format for request that is processed with `api` pipeline).

NOTE: all keys and values if incoming params are strings!

### scrubbing params

- <https://stackoverflow.com/a/33976964/3632318>
- <https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/Phoenix.Controller.html#scrub_params/2>

- checks to see if the required_key is present
  (= `params.require(:user)` in Rails)
- changes empty parameters (empty strings) of required_key
  (recursively) to nils

it doesn't make sense to use it when providing API.

### status codes

<https://hexdocs.pm/plug/Plug.Conn.Status.html>:

- `:continue` - 100
- `:switching_protocols` - 101
- `:processing` - 102
- `:ok` - 200
- `:created` - 201
- `:accepted` - 202
- `:non_authoritative_information` - 203
- `:no_content` - 204
- `:reset_content` - 205
- `:partial_content` - 206
- `:multi_status` - 207
- `:already_reported` - 208
- `:im_used` - 226
- `:multiple_choices` - 300
- `:moved_permanently` - 301
- `:found` - 302
- `:see_other` - 303
- `:not_modified` - 304
- `:use_proxy` - 305
- `:switch_proxy` - 306
- `:temporary_redirect` - 307
- `:permanent_redirect` - 308
- `:bad_request` - 400
- `:unauthorized` - 401
- `:payment_required` - 402
- `:forbidden` - 403
- `:not_found` - 404
- `:method_not_allowed` - 405
- `:not_acceptable` - 406
- `:proxy_authentication_required` - 407
- `:request_timeout` - 408
- `:conflict` - 409
- `:gone` - 410
- `:length_required` - 411
- `:precondition_failed` - 412
- `:request_entity_too_large` - 413
- `:request_uri_too_long` - 414
- `:unsupported_media_type` - 415
- `:requested_range_not_satisfiable` - 416
- `:expectation_failed` - 417
- `:im_a_teapot` - 418
- `:misdirected_request` - 421
- `:unprocessable_entity` - 422
- `:locked` - 423
- `:failed_dependency` - 424
- `:unordered_collection` - 425
- `:upgrade_required` - 426
- `:precondition_required` - 428
- `:too_many_requests` - 429
- `:request_header_fields_too_large` - 431
- `:internal_server_error` - 500
- `:not_implemented` - 501
- `:bad_gateway` - 502
- `:service_unavailable` - 503
- `:gateway_timeout` - 504
- `:http_version_not_supported` - 505
- `:variant_also_negotiates` - 506
- `:insufficient_storage` - 507
- `:loop_detected` - 508
- `:not_extended` - 510
- `:network_authentication_required` - 511

<https://stackoverflow.com/a/2342589/3632318>:

> For a PUT request: HTTP 200 (OK) or HTTP 204 (No Content) should imply
> "resource updated successfully".
>
> For a DELETE request: HTTP 200 (OK) or HTTP 204 (No Content) should imply
> "resource deleted successfully". HTTP 202 can also be returned which would
> imply that the instruction was accepted by the server and the "resource was
> marked for deletion".

## views

<https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/views.html>

> If you are familiar with decorators or the facade pattern, this is similar.

> Note that we didn’t need to fully qualify title/0 with HelloWeb.LayoutView
> because our LayoutView actually does the rendering (it's a local function call).
> In fact, “templates” in Phoenix area really just function definitions on their
> view module.

> At compile-time, Phoenix precompiles all *.html.eex templates and turns them
> into render/2 function clauses on their respective view modules. At runtime,
> all templates are already loaded in memory.

say, we can replace _page/index.html.eex_ with the following `render/2` function:

```elixir
defmodule HelloWeb.PageView do
  use HelloWeb, :view

  def render("index.html", assigns) do
    # html string with interpolated variables from `assigns` map
  end
end
```

NOTE: there're `render/2` and `render/3` functions - the former implies
      current view while the latter states the view explicitly.

so any template will be precompiled into corresponding `render/2` function inside
view. also it's possible to create such function manually - say, in order to render
different template or return text instead as it's done in `ErrorView` module:

```elixir
defmodule HelloWeb.ErrorView do
  use HelloWeb, :view

  def render("404.html", _assigns) do
    "Page not found"
  end
end
```

I guess if you create such function:

```elixir
def render("404.html", assigns) do
  render("404.html", assigns)
end
```

you'll end up with an infinite loop.

### rendering in IEx

we can render any template manually in IEx:

```elixir
iex> Phoenix.View.render(HelloWeb.PageView, "test.html", %{})
```

that's how any template is rendered inside layout:

```elixir
<%= render @view_module, @view_template, assigns %>
```

### rendering JSON

> Phoenix uses Poison to encode Maps to JSON, so all we need to do in our views is
> format the data we’d like to respond with as a Map, and Phoenix will do the rest.
> It is possible to respond with JSON back directly from the controller and skip
> the View. However, if we think about a controller as having the responsibilities
> of receiving a request and fetching data to be sent back, data manipulation and
> formatting don’t fall under those responsibilities.

### rendering errors

1. <https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/Phoenix.Endpoint.html>
2. <https://github.com/phoenixframework/phoenix/issues/1945>

for error template to be rendered correctly:

- debug pages must be disabled (default for production)

  _config/prod.exs_ (no changes):

  ```elixir
  config :billing, BillingWeb.Endpoint,
    # ...
    debug_errors: false,
    # ...
  ```

- request format must be supported in endpoint configuration

  request format is determined using either `Accept` request header
  or extension in request url (say, `.json`).

  _config/config.exs_:

  ```elixir
  config :billing, BillingWeb.Endpoint,
    # ...
    render_errors: [view: BillingWeb.ErrorView, accepts: ~w(json)],
  ```

  if request format is not supported, `html` format will be used as fallback
  and the following warning will be printed in log:

  ```
  [warn] Could not render errors due to no supported media type in accept header.
  ...
  Errors will be rendered using the first accepted format "html" as fallback.
  Please customize the :accepts option under the :render_errors configuration
  in your endpoint if you want to support other formats or choose another fallback
  ```

- `ErrorView` must have corresponding `render/2` clause

  <https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/custom_errors.html>:

  > Any errors which don’t match an existing clause of render/2
  > will be caught by template_not_found/2.

#### rendering both HTML and JSON errors

- support both request formats in endpoint configuration

  _config/config.exs_:

  ```elixir
  config :billing, BillingWeb.Endpoint,
    # ...
    render_errors: [view: BillingWeb.ErrorView, accepts: ~w(html json)],
  ```

- modify `ErrorView` to process both formats

  1. <https://elixirforum.com/t/poison-encodeerror-when-incoming-post-request-fails/2796/2>

  _lib/billing_web/views/error_view.ex_:

  ```elixir
  defmodule BillingWeb.ErrorView do
    use BillingWeb, :view

    def render("404.html", _assigns) do
      "Page not found"
    end

    # ...

    def render("404.json", _assigns) do
      %{error: "Resource not found"}
    end

    # ...

    def template_not_found(template, assigns) do
      extname = Path.extname(template)
      render("500#{extname}", assigns)
    end
  end
  ```

#### debug pages vs. error templates (ErrorView)

- `dev` environment

  <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/30536979> (Jose Valim):

  > In :dev, the default is to show debug pages, because the majority of times
  > you have an error while building your code. If you want to see the actually
  > rendered error page, you need to set debug_errors: false in your config/dev.exs.

  in `dev` environment debug pages are rendered by default (nice pages a la
  `Better Errors`) instead of actual error templates (that is `ErrorView`
  is ignored at all) because of `debug_errors: true` in _config.dev.exs_:

  ```elixir
  config :billing, BillingWeb.Endpoint,
    # ...
    debug_errors: true,
    # ...
  ```

  set it to `false` to render errors like in production.

- `prod` environment

  <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/30536979> (Jose Valim):

  > In :prod, the default is to render error pages, so you should
  > see a page rendered by YourApp.ErrorView with the status code.
  >
  > In :test, it works like production...

  in all other environments but `dev` one `debug_errors` option is set
  to `false` so actual error templates are rendered using `ErrorView`.

## templates

<http://www.jeramysingleton.com/phoenix-templates-are-just-functions/>:

> At compile time,
> `def render("index.html", assigns), do: # your compiled eex template here`
> would be injected into your module
>
> It is exactly the same as if you wrote the function yourself

<https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/adding_pages.html>:

in templates properties from `assigns` can be accessed with `@`
(it's not module attribute in this case): `@user` = `assigns.user`.

<https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/templates.html>:

> The way we pass data into a template is by the assigns map, and the way we get
> the values out of the assigns map is by referencing the keys with a preceding @.
> @ is actually a macro that translates @key to Map.get(assigns, :key)

## assets

1. <https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/static_assets.html>
2. <https://til.hashrocket.com/posts/1a3639476e-serve-static-filesdirectories-in-phoenix>
3. <https://hexdocs.pm/phoenix/deployment.html#compiling-your-application-assets>

I generated project with `--no-brunch` option so first of all I had to
restore default configuration for Brunch and assets directory structure.

- generate dummy project with Brunch support to copy missing parts from:

  ```sh
  $ cd ~/tmp/
  $ mix phx.new phoenix_with_brunch
  ```

- copy _assets/_ directory in full
- amend _.gitignore_ with new paths:

  ```diff
  + npm-debug.log
  + /assets/node_modules
  + /priv/static/
  ```

- install npm packages:

  ```sh
  $ cd assets/
  $ yarn install
  ```

- build assets (generate digests and cache manifest):

  ```sh
  $ cd assets/
  $ node node_modules/brunch/bin/brunch build
  ```

  or for production:

  ```sh
  $ cd assets/
  $ node node_modules/brunch/bin/brunch build --production
  ```

- generate digest and cache manifest (for production only):

  ```sh
  $ MIX_ENV=prod mix phx.digest
  ```
