---
layout: post
title: chef FAQ
date: 2016-02-27 01:16:00 +0300
access: public
categories: [chef]
---

FAQ

<!-- more -->

## how knife connects to node?

### knife-solo

#### bootstrapping

it's possible to connect to node using:

- domain or IP address

  current user is used unless it's specified explicitly
  (user@domain or user@ip).

  you are always prompted to enter password.

- host from SSH config

  passwordless authentication is used.

- user@ip

  passwordless authentication is used if
  corresponding entry in SSH config is found.

  user can be specified with `knife[:ssh_user]` option in _knife.rb_.

knife-solo creates new node file in _nodes/_ after bootstrapping the node.

node file name:

  - domain (when using domain/host to bootstrap the node)
  - IP address (when using IP address).

#### cooking

when using knife-solo and chef-solo there is no chef server where
information about nodes might be stored.
that is why knife connects to node in the same way as described above
for bootstraping.

cooking:

- chef repo is uploaded to _~/chef-solo/_ directory in
  specified user's home directory
- chef-solo searches for node file in uploaded chef repo -
  node file name must be the same as domain or IP address used
  to connect to the node. if such node file is not found
  chef-solo creates a new one with empty run-list
- chef-solo provisions the node using node file
  (it is created if it doesn't exist - see previous step)

### knife-zero

#### bootstrapping

same as file for knife-solo except that it's possible to specify
node name with `--node-name` option when bootstrapping the node -
node file will have specified name.

if using host from SSH config it's used as a node name.

#### cooking

after bootstrapping node is added to the list of nodes on chef-zero
server (use `knife zero show tap349 -z` to view node information).

information about the node (such as FQDN, IP, Platform, etc.) is retrieved
from automatic attributes collected by ohai during bootstrapping
(corresponding attributes: fqdn, ipaddress, platform, etc.).

when cooking we **search** for node on chef-zero server using node name
assigned to the node during bootstrapping:

```sh
$ knife zero converge 'name:tap349'
```

when cooking knife-zero tries to connect to node using FQDN by default
(node's FQDN is read from node information on chef-zero server) -
consequently changing host, domain or IP address in
either SSH config or node file itself has no effect on cooking.

it's possible to make knife-zero use IP instead of FQDN for opening
the connection to the node by specifying `-a, --attribute` option
([doc](https://knife-zero.github.io/30_subcommands/)):

> The attribute to use for opening the connection

```sh
$ knife zero converge 'name:tap349' -a ipaddress
```

or set attribute permanently in _knife.rb_:

```ruby
knife[:attribute] = 'ipaddress'
```

BTW after setting specific attribute for knife only this attribute
will be shown in node information with `knife node show tap349 -z` command.
also it's possible to specify multiple attributes for knife in
`knife[:attribute]` option using array `['ipaddress', 'fqdn']`:
only specified attributes will be shown in node information but it will
break `knife zero converge` command as it expects a string - not array:

```sh
Exception: NoMethodError: undefined method `split' for ["ipaddress"]:Array
```
