---
layout: post
title: Cucumber
date: 2017-04-18 13:17:39 +0300
access: public
categories: [cucumber]
---

<!-- more -->

## cucumber

### configuration

_config/cucumber.yml_:

```yaml
<% common_options = '--format pretty' %>

# it's not necessary to specify features directory as argument
default: <%= common_options %>
focus: <%= common_options %> --tags @focus
```

### rake task

_Rakefile_:

```ruby
require 'cucumber/rake/task'

Cucumber::Rake::Task.new(:features) do |task|
  # default options are set in cucumber.yml
  task.fork = false
end
```

it's not necessary to specify description with `desc 'bla bla bla'`
because `Cucumber::Rake::Task` already provides description.

### syntax highlighting in vim

to enable syntax highlighting for feature files in vim
it's not required to install `tpope/vim-cucumber` plugin.

### step definitions

it doesn't matter what the name of directory for step definitions is:
all files in _features/_ directory are recursively required.

I prefer to name it `steps` for the sake of brevity.

### wip

<https://github.com/cucumber/cucumber/wiki/Tags>

it's like using `pending` in RSpec.

default profile already includes `--tags ~@wip` filter -
scenarios marked with @wip tag will not be run.

### focus

<https://github.com/cucumber/cucumber/wiki/Tags>

- add @focus tag to selected scenarios

  ```cucumber
  @vcr @debug @focus
  Scenario: First run
    ...
  ```

- run scenarios with @focus tag

  ```sh
  $ bundle exec cucumber --tags @focus
  ```

  or using `focus` profile:

  ```sh
  $ bundle exec cucumber --profile focus
  ```

### debugging

to show all log messages on screen when running tests temporarily assign
`$stdout` and `$stderr` to `STDOUT` and `STDERR` accordingly in `Runner`
class.

if debugging error in bitbucket pipeline temporarily add lines to log
errors to `STDERR` as well (along with logging to `$stderr`) in top level
class which catches all errors (say, `CLI`) - this should be done in order
not to break tests that check expected output of executed commands.

## aruba

AWD - aruba working directory

### configuration

_features/support/aruba.rb_:

```ruby
require 'aruba/cucumber'
```

that's all that is required to use aruba steps in your features.

### AWD

by default AWD is _tmp/aruba/_ (this is where all temporary files are created).

### set home directory to AWD

mock home directory (set HOME environment variable to AWD):
<https://relishapp.com/philoserf/aruba/docs/environment/mock-the-home-variable>.

### environment variables and dotenv

it's safe to set environment variables in tests - dotenv will not overwrite
existing environments (unless instructed to do so with `Dotenv.overload`).

### checking exit status

don't check exit status when using 'I successfully run `cmd`' step -
test will always either fail or return exit status 0.

### fixtures

when using a fixture its directory is copied to AWD (_tmp/aruba/_)
and fixture directory becomes new AWD.

mock home directory after using fixture so that home is set to new AWD
(which is fixture directory then) - using @mocked-home-directory tag
doesn't work because in that case home directory is set before running
scenario (and changing AWD by fixture accordingly):

```cucumber
  Scenario: New library contains more items than in store
    Given I use the fixture "with_items_12_in_store"
    And a mocked home directory
    ...
```

## troubleshooting

### syntastic doesn't find aruba step definitions

- https://github.com/tpope/vim-cucumber/issues/30
- http://fasteragile.com/blog/2015/05/15/highlighting-undefined-cucumber-step-definitions-with-syntastic-in-vim/

**description**

it's necessary to require `aruba/cucumber` so that syntastic could find
aruba step definitions. this file is required in _features/support/env.rb_
as recommended in aruba documentation. but syntastic kept on showing
`Cucumber::Undefined` errors for all aruba steps.

**solution**

I edited _~/.vim/vimrc_ to run cucumber with syntastic profile:

```vim
let g:syntastic_cucumber_cucumber_args='--profile syntastic'
```

and required _features/support_ directory explicitly for syntastic profile
in _config/cucumber.yml_:

```yaml
<% common_options = '--format pretty' %>

default: <%= common_options %>
syntastic: -r features/support <%= common_options %>
```

but that didn't help.

in the end it turned out the problem was with the name of support file -
syntastic refused to find exactly _features/support/env.rb_.

btw `aruba init --test-framework cucumber` generates _features/support/aruba.rb_
so I renamed _env.rb_ to _aruba.rb_ too. after that syntastic no longer showed
errors for aruba steps - only for not implemented ones. moreover filename doesn't
even matter - it can be anything but _env.rb_.

long story short:

syntastic doesn't require _features/support/env.rb_ for some reason -
just rename it to something else (say, _aruba.rb_). no modifications to
_config/cucumber.yml_ or _~/.vim/vimrc_ are necessary.

### environment variables are not loaded with dotenv

**description**

<https://github.com/bkeepers/dotenv>:

> By default, load will look for a file called .env in the current working directory.

but cucumber changes cwd so _.env_ cannot be found in tests and
environment variables are not loaded accordingly.

**solution**

get path of _.env_ file relative to current file (say, _bin/my_app.rb_)
and load it explicitly:

```ruby
require 'dotenv'
Dotenv.load(File.expand_path('../../.env', __FILE__))
```

UPDATE: now I set all environment variables in feature itself.

### false positive in the step `the following files should exist`

- <https://github.com/cucumber/aruba/blob/master/lib/aruba/cucumber/file.rb>
- <https://github.com/cucumber/aruba/blob/master/lib/aruba/api/filesystem.rb>

**description**

any string in the first line of data table provided as argument to the step
`the following files should exist` is considered to be an existing file.

this step is defined in aruba gem so the problem must be with this gem.

**solution**

it has turned out that the latest release (v0.14.2) of aruba has bug
in _lib/aruba/cucumber/file.rb:82_:

```ruby
files = files.rows.flatten
```

here `files.rows` returns all rows in data table except header but according to
[docs](https://github.com/cucumber/aruba/blob/master/features/testing_frameworks/cucumber/steps/filesystem/existence_of_file.feature#L23)
data table argument to this step doesn't have a header -
thus the first line in data table (which is a file to be checked for presence)
is treated as a header (which can be anything - it's ignored anyway).

in the line above `raw` function should be used instead:

```ruby
files = files.raw.flatten
```

here `files.raw` returns all rows including header.
this is fixed in master branch of aruba.

long story short:

use master branch of aruba or provide fake header in data table
when checking files for existence or not existence.

if using master branch don't forget to run cucumber tests using
`bundle exec cucumber` or `bundle exec rake cucumber`
(not `cucumber` or `\rake cucumber`) - otherwise gem version
(vs. Git version) of aruba is used:

```sh
$ which aruba
/Users/tap/.rbenv/shims/aruba
$ rbenv which aruba
/Users/tap/.rbenv/versions/2.4.1/bin/aruba
$ bundle exec which aruba
/Users/tap/.rbenv/versions/2.4.1/lib/ruby/gems/2.4.0/bin/aruba
```
