---
layout: post
title: asdf
date: 2017-08-04 12:35:57 +0300
access: public
comments: true
categories: [asdf]
---

<!-- more -->

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
* TOC
{:toc}
<hr>

1. <http://labs.cd2h.org/gitforager/repository/repository.jsp?id=97853012>

## install asdf

```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/asdf-vm/asdf.git ~/.asdf
$ echo 'source ~/.asdf/asdf.sh' >> $ZDOTDIR/.zshrc
```

don't install asdf via brew because:

- brew formula places asdf files into _/usr/local/opt/asdf/_

  it would be necessary to source _/usr/local/opt/asdf/asdf.sh_ instead of
  _~/.asdf/asdf.sh_ while according to official asdf docs it's required to
  source the latter.

- asdf just doesn't work

  in case of Elixir (maybe this is the case with other languages as well):
  after installing plugin and setting current version, `elixir` executable
  is not found if asdf is installed via brew.

## install plugins

`PLUGIN` is a language like `elixir` or `ruby`:

```sh
$ asdf plugin-add PLUGIN
$ asdf list-all PLUGIN
$ asdf install PLUGIN 1.0.0
$ asdf global PLUGIN 1.0.0
$ asdf current PLUGIN
```

installed plugins and their versions are stored in _~/.asdf/installs/_.

## update plugins

```sh
$ asdf plugin-update ruby
$ asdf plugin-update --all
```

### Elixir

1. <https://github.com/asdf-vm/asdf-elixir>

uninstall system Elixir before adding Elixir plugin:

```sh
$ brew uninstall --force elixir
$ rm -rf ~/.mix/
```

### Ruby

1. <https://github.com/asdf-vm/asdf-ruby>

NOTE: asdf uses ruby-build to build and install Ruby under the hood.

add support for existing _.ruby-version_ files after adding Ruby plugin:

```conf
# ~/.asdfrc

legacy_version_file = yes
```

use _.ruby-version_ for legacy projects and _.tool-versions_ for new ones.

## shims

> <https://asdf-vm.com/#/core-manage-versions?id=shims>
>
> When asdf-vm installs a package it creates shims for every executable program
> in that package in a $ASDF_DATA_DIR/shims directory (default ~/.asdf/shims).
> This directory being on the $PATH (by means of asdf.sh or asdf.fish) is how
> the installed programs are made available in the environment.

=> this is exactly what rbenv does.

shims are not created automatically when language-specific package manager is
used to install packages (say, bundler to install Ruby gems) - it's necessary
to create all missing shims for that language manually:

```sh
$ asdf reshim PLUGIN
/ or
$ asdf reshim PLUGIN VERSION
```

this must be the same as running `rbenv rehash` in case of rbenv.

in case of Ruby it's always possible to run executable via `bundle exec` - even
if its shim is not created:

```sh
$ bundle exec rails console
```

## .tool-versions

> <https://asdf-vm.com/#/core-configuration?id=tool-versions>
>
> Add a .tool-versions file to your project dir and versions of those tools
> will be used. Global defaults can be set in the file $HOME/.tool-versions.

`asdf global` command writes specified tool version to _~/.tool-versions_.

## command-t

> <http://labs.cd2h.org/gitforager/repository/repository.jsp?id=97853012>
>
> if you want to set a version only for the current shell session or for
> executing just a command under a particular tool version, you can set
> an environment variable like ASDF_${TOOL}_VERSION.

```diff
  " ~/.vim/vimrc

  Plug 'wincent/command-t', {
-       \   'do': 'cd ruby/command-t/ext/command-t && RBENV_VERSION=system ruby extconf.rb && make'
+       \   'do': 'cd ruby/command-t/ext/command-t && ASDF_RUBY_VERSION=2.6.5 ruby extconf.rb && make'
        \ }
```

NOTE: change `ASDF_RUBY_VERSION` to whatever Ruby version current MacVim bottle
is compiled against so that Ruby versions match.

## Troubleshooting

### asdf: No version set for command rspec

```
$ bundle exec rspec
asdf: No version set for command rspec
you might want to add one of the following in your .tool-versions file:

ruby 2.6.5
```

**solution**

this error just means that `rspec` gem is not installed - add it to _Gemfile_
and `bundle install`.
