---
layout: post
title: bundler
date: 2017-04-17 19:27:01 +0300
access: public
comments: true
categories: [bundler]
---

<!-- more -->

groups
------

<http://bundler.io/groups.html>

gems outside any named group are in `default` group.

install gems from all groups:

```sh
$ bundle
```

install gems from all groups except `production`:

```sh
$ bundle --without production
```

if your app is gem dependent gems are added to gemspec file instead of
_Gemfile_ using `add_runtime_dependency` (kind of `default` group) or
`add_development_dependency` (kind of `development` group) methods.
these dependencies are then included in _Gemfile_ using `gemspec` directive.
in this case _Gemfile_ might contain only `test` or custom groups.

require
-------

<http://bundler.io/groups.html>

require all gems from groups `default` and `production`:

```ruby
Bundler.require(:default, :production)
```

Rails app by default requires `default` and group corresponding to
current environment in _config/application.rb_:

```ruby
# Rails.groups = [:default, Rails.env]
Bundler.require(*Rails.groups)
```

in plain Ruby app you have 2 options:

- require all gems from all or selected groups in _lib/my_app.rb_
  (common entry point of CLI application or gem)

  ```ruby
  # require gems from all groups
  Bundler.require
  # require gems from default and production groups
  Bundler.require(:default, :production)
  ```

  current environment can be fetched from custom environment
  variable - you've got to set it manually when launching app.

  this method is recommended for large `Gemfile`s.

- require gems manually in appropriate files where they are used

  - gems from `test` group (say, `rspec`) are required in
    _spec/spec_helper.rb_
  - gems which are used in _Rakefile_ only (say, `rubocop`) are
    required only there
  - `pry-byebug` gem can be required in _lib/my_app.rb_ only if
    `DEBUG` environment variable is set

  this method is recommended for smaller `Gemfile`s.

setup
-----

<http://bundler.io/bundler_setup.html>

bundler setup configures the load path so that gems from all or
specified groups can be required.

- configure the load path for all gems:

  ```ruby
  require 'bundler/setup'
  ```

- configure the load paths for gems from specified groups:

  ```ruby
  Bundler.setup(:default, :development)
  ```

- in theory you should first configure the load path and then require gems:

  ```ruby
  require 'bundler/setup'
  Bundler.require
  ```

  but in practice I don't configure the load path as described above -
  all gems can be required without configuring the load path first.

  UPDATE: I encountered situations when gem cannot be loaded because it's
          not found without calling `require 'bundler/setup'` first -
          this is the case for `ruby-fifo` gem and my own gem `files`.
          thus I had to configure the load path before requiring gems by adding
          `require 'bundler/setup'` to the beginning of _lib/my_app.rb_ file.
