---
layout: post
title: CircleCI
date: 2018-05-31 19:28:15 +0300
access: private
comments: true
categories: [circleci]
---

<!-- more -->

* TOC
{:toc}
<hr>

SSH
---

1. <https://circleci.com/gh/shikimori/neko-achievements/edit#ssh>

> <https://circleci.com/docs/1.0/permissions-and-access-during-deployment/>
>
> The ssh private keys that you add from the page are stored under the ~/.ssh
> directory for the build user in the container. We also add entries to
> ~/.ssh/config to specify which key is used to access which host. For example,
> if you add a key with the hostname prod-server, then ~/.ssh/id_prod-server
> will be automatically created and ~/.ssh/config will have an entry that looks
> like:
>
> ```
> Host prod-server
> IdentitiesOnly yes
> IdentityFile /home/ubuntu/.ssh/id_prod-server
> ```

SSH config is not available on CI/CD server (unless you copy it explicitly) =>
use IP address instead of SSH config entry name to specify hostname:

- when adding your private key in project settings on CircleCI
- in deploy config of your application (say, _.deliver/config_)

caching
-------

1. <https://circleci.com/docs/2.0/caching/>

CircleCI 2.0 caching finally clicked with me after reading this comment:

> <https://discuss.circleci.com/t/circle-2-0-caching-is-too-limited-to-be-very-useful/11694/2>
>
> ```yaml
> - restore_cache:
>     keys:
>       - projectname-npm-deps-{{ .Branch }}-{{ checksum "package.json" }}
>       - projectname-npm-deps-{{ .Branch }}
>       - projectname-npm-deps-
> ```
>
> After the restore_cache step above you run npm install and npm will ‘fill in
> the gaps’. So let’s say we were only able to restore the last (least specific)
> cache above - it’s likely that most of your dependencies will be similar and
> npm install will figure out what else needs installing.

cache archives are uploaded to external storage and are available across
different containers and builds (say, you can save cache in build job and
restore it in deploy job - jobs are using separate Docker containers).

troubleshooting
---------------

### build is not starting after changes are pushed to Github

**solution**

there was an error in my CircleCI config - `version: 2` key was missing in
`workflows` section.

I have found this error by clicking project name (or else it's possible to
click any branch of the project):

| CircleCI: `BUILDS` (left menu) → `<project_name>` (link)

you'll see a big yellow `NEEDS SETUP` button if there are any config errors.

### /bin/bash: yarn: command not found

**solution**

pre-built CircleCI Docker image `circleci/ruby:2.5.1` doesn't have
Yarn preinstalled - use `-node` image variant instead:

> <https://circleci.com/docs/2.0/yarn/#using-yarn-in-circleci>
>
> If you are using one of the other language images such as circleci/python
> or circleci/ruby, there are two image variants that will include Yarn as
> well as NodeJS. These would be the -node and -node-browsers image variants.

### Rails.application.credentials are empty in Rails 5.2+

**solution**

1. <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48935168/handle-credentials-in-circleci-rails-app>

Rails 5.2 uses encrypted _config/credentials.yml.enc_ to store credentials and
_config/master.key_ to decrypt it but the latter is not available on CircleCI.

it's possible to store master key in `RAILS_MASTER_KEY` environment variable:

> <http://guides.rubyonrails.org/5_1_release_notes.html#encrypted-secrets>
>
> Secrets will be decrypted in production, using a key stored either in the
> RAILS_MASTER_KEY environment variable, or in a key file.

| CircleCI: Project Settings → `BUILD SETTINGS` (section) → `Environment Variables`

### deploy job prompts for deploy user password

**solution**

1. <https://circleci.com/docs/2.0/configuration-reference/#add_ssh_keys>
2. <https://support.circleci.com/hc/en-us/articles/115015628247-Are-you-sure-you-want-to-continue-connecting-yes-no->

I haven't added my private SSH key:

| CircleCI: Project Settings → `PERMISSIONS` (section) → `SSH permissions`
| `Add SSH key` (button)

- `Hostname` (input): server IP from _config/deploy/production.rb_
- `Private Key` (textarea): contents of your _~/.ssh/id_rsa_

after SSH key is added, you'll see its fingerprint - use it to add SSH key
in `add_ssh_keys` step of `deploy` job in CircleCI config:

```diff
  # _.circleci/config.yml_

  jobs:
    deploy:
      steps:
        - checkout
+       - add_ssh_keys:
+           fingerprints:
+             - '21:cd:07:a3:b8:b9:1f:20:b0:eb:59:c7:e3:14:fc:5e'
```

NOTE: it's possible not to specify which SSH keys to use (via fingerprints)
      explicitly in CircleCI config - by default all added SSH keys will be
      loaded:

> <https://circleci.com/docs/2.0/configuration-reference/#add_ssh_keys>
>
> Note that CircleCI 2.0 jobs are auto configured with ssh-agent with all keys
> auto-loaded, and is sufficient for most cases. add_ssh_keys may be needed to
> have greater control over which SSH keys to authenticate
