---
layout: post
title: GraphQL
date: 2018-01-25 22:42:22 +0300
access: public
comments: true
categories: [api, graphql]
---

<!-- more -->

* TOC
{:toc}
<hr>

<http://graphql.org/learn/queries/>

> GraphQL queries look the same for both single items or lists of items,
> however we know which one to expect based on what is indicated in the schema.

> The operation type is either query, mutation, or subscription and describes
> what type of operation you're intending to do.
>
> The operation name is a meaningful and explicit name for your operation.

<http://graphql.org/learn/schema/>

GraphQL type language is any language (say, Ruby):

> GraphQL services can be written in any language. Since we can't rely on a
> specific programming language syntax, like JavaScript, to talk about GraphQL
> schemas, we'll define our own simple language. We'll use the "GraphQL schema
> language" - it's similar to the query language, and allows us to talk about
> GraphQL schemas in a language-agnostic way.

> Object types, scalars, and enums are the only kinds of types
> you can define in GraphQL.

> GraphQL comes with a set of default scalar types out of the box:
>
> Int: A signed 32‐bit integer.
> Float: A signed double-precision floating-point value.
> String: A UTF‐8 character sequence.
> Boolean: true or false.
> ID: The ID scalar type represents a unique identifier, often used to
>   refetch an object or as the key for a cache. The ID type is serialized
>   in the same way as a String; however, defining it as an ID signifies
>   that it is not intended to be human‐readable.

Non-Null type modifier (`!`) is used after type name:

- to mark field as Non-Null in schema
- to mark field argument as Non-Null in query

> input types look exactly the same as regular object types,
> but with the keyword input instead of type

<http://graphql.org/learn/execution/>

> Each field on each type is backed by a function called the resolver which
> is provided by the GraphQL server developer. When a field is executed, the
> corresponding resolver is called to produce the next value.
>
> If a field produces a scalar value like a string or number, then the
> execution completes. However if a field produces an object value then
> the query will contain another selection of fields which apply to that
> object. This continues until scalar values are reached. GraphQL queries
> always end at scalar values.

field options
-------------

field options can be specified:

- with a keyword

  ```ruby
  field :profile, Types::ProfileType, name: 'Profile'
  ```

- inside the block

  ```ruby
  field :profile, Types::ProfileType do
    name 'Profile'
  end
  ```

### `name` field option

field name is how field is referred to in query:

```
{
  profile {
    id
  }
}
```

it can't contain spaces, must be human-readable and unique within schema.

```ruby
field :profile, Types::ProfileType # name -> `profile`
field :profile, Types::ProfileType, name: 'Profile' # name -> `Profile`
field :profile, Types::ProfileType do # name -> `Profile`
  name 'Profile'
end
```
