---
layout: post
title: Rancher
date: 2019-01-04 16:44:45 +0300
access: private
comments: true
categories: [docker]
---

<!-- more -->

* TOC
{:toc}
<hr>

notes
-----

1. <https://rancher.com/docs/rancher/v1.6/en/quick-start-guide>

### what is it for?

Rancher provides infrastructure services (`healthcheck`, `ipsec`, etc.) grouped
in infrastructure stacks.

> <https://rancher.com/docs/rancher/v1.6/en/quick-start-guide/#create-a-container-through-ui>
>
> A stack is just a convenient way to group services together.

> Rancher UI: Default (top menu) → Manage Environments → Environment Templates
>
> An environment template allows users to define a different combination of
> infrastructure services to be deployed.
>
> The infrastructure services includes but not limited to container orchestration
> (i.e. cattle, kubernetes, mesos, swarm, networking) or Rancher services
> (i.e healthcheck, dns, metadata, scheduling, service discovery and storage).

> <https://rancher.com/docs/rancher/v1.6/en/quick-start-guide/#infrastructure-services>
>
> When you first log in to Rancher, you are automatically in a Default
> environment. The default cattle environment template has been selected
> for this environment to launch infrastructure services.
>
> These infrastructure services are required to be launched to take advantage
> of Rancher’s benefits like dns, metadata, networking, and health checks.
> These infrastructure stacks can be found in Stacks -> Infrastructure.

tips
----

### (how to) specify host for a new stack

1. <https://rancher.com/docs/rancher/v1.6/en/quick-start-guide/#create-a-container-through-ui>
2. <https://forums.rancher.com/t/stack-specify-host-resolved/1870>

by default host is assigned automatically.

however it's possible to assign a specific host for a new stack by adding
a label to the host and specifying this label in _docker-compose.yml_:

```yaml
labels: io.rancher.scheduler.affinity: "mylabel"
```

### (how to) edit environment variables (and other container settings)

> <https://github.com/rancher/rancher/issues/1132#issuecomment-110819232>
>
> Rancher does not have that because Docker doesn't. You can clone a container
> from the UI though, which is like adding a new one but with all the settings
> defaulted to the same as they were in the original container.

2 solutions:

- `Clone` (service menu)
- `Upgrade` (service menu)

probably `Upgrade` is just a convenience action and does `Clone` under the hood.

troubleshooting
---------------

### 502 Bad Gateway

`web` service returns `502 Bad Gateway` response.

**solution**

restart `web` service through UI.
